Abdullah Aymaz is a turkish islamic preacher and writer and was born in Kütahya, Turkey in 1949. Life and achievements Ayaz moved to Izmir as a teenager and visited the İzmir İmam Hatip high school. He did his higher education at İzmir Yüksek İslam Enstitüsü  and he worked as a teacher in Tire and Izmir. His career as a journalist as well as a writer started in 1988 when he started to work for the Turkish newspaper Zaman.Turkish Theologian, Journalist, Writer Abdullah Aymaz was born on 1945, in Emet, Turkey. After studying at the primary school, he moved to Izmir, where he met with Turkish scholar and opinion leader Fethullah Gulen and Hizmet (Service) Movement, to study at religious vocational high school and Islamic Institute. During his time in high school, he wrote up articles for Gurbet magazine. He served as teacher and manager of educational foundations in several places of Izmir. In 1979, his religious and educational articles began to be published in Sızıntı magazine, which is the very first publication of Hizmet Movement. As of 1988, his journalism career commenced in Zaman newspaper, in which he also served as editor-in-chief until 1992. As writer, he published more than 50 books under the pen names of Huseyin Bayram, Ismail Yediler and Safvet Senih. Currently, his articles are still published in Zaman Europe.  Aymaz is one of the first names that come to mind when one thinks of Hizmet Movement. Because he spent most of his time with Fethullah Gülen in his youth and after, he internalizes the vision of Gülen. Considering the very beginning of Hizmet Movement, he has a very important role in the formation of movement’s discourse. 19 In March 1997, he conveyed Fethullah Gülen's letter to Pope John Paul II. Since the days in Izmir, where Gülen's outstanding discourse began to crystallize, Abdullah Aymaz has become an integral part of him and the movement. Sadık Yar Meryem Gibi Sen Yusuf Musun? Yusuflar'a Günümüz Yusuflarına Evrensel Dil Işığın Düştüğü Yerler Kardelenlerimiz Şifa Çiçekleri Diyalog Adımları Çitlembik 1 /Nükteler Çitlembik-2 /Nükteler Çitlembik-3 / Su Gibi Aziz Çitlembik-4 / Şahit Olmaya Geldik Sahip Olmaya Geldik Çitlembik-5 / Dua Hazinesi Çitlembik-6 / Anadolu'nun En Büyük Sadakası Yaratılış ve Darwinizm Lemaat Münazarat Sünuhat Barla Lahikası Üzerine Ayetül Kübra Üzerine Kastamonu Lahikası Üzerine Emirdağ Lahikası Üzerine-1 Emirdağ Lahikası Üzerine-2 Muhakemat Üzerine Sadeleştirme ve Açıklama Hutbe-i Şamiye Üzerine Sadeleştirme ve Açıklama Cihetsiz Sesler (Göze Takılanlar – 1) Bakıp Göremediklerimiz (Göze Takılanlar – 2) Sözün Çağrısı (Göze Takılanlar −3) Söz Saati (Göze Takılanlar – 4) Göze Takılanlar / Makaleler ve Gezi Notları 1-2-3-4His work using his pen name: Hüseyin Bayram Zeka Tomurcuklarına DamlalarHis work using his pen name: Safvet Senih Dışa Yansıyan İç Dünyamız (1–2) Duyduklarım Gördüklerim Hatıralar Işığında Kelimeler Armonisi Öze İşleyen Söz Hücre Devleti Hikmet Gaybın Haberleri Peygamberler Kıssa-i Musa Hızır ve Dostları Hızıri Adımlar / Uzakları Yakın Eylemek Şüpheler Üzerine İlim Açısından Kader Yaratılış ve Kader Ölüm ve Diriliş Ruhlar ve Ötesi Kur'an ve İlimler Kur'an da Edebi Veche Miraç Şehsuvarı Mercan Mağaraları Hadislerin Işığında Hadiseler Hazinelerin Anahtarı Besmele İbadetin Getirdikleri Zilzal ve Dua / Yüzyılın Felaketi Depreme Farklı Bir Bakış == References ==