Alice Ceresa (Basel, 25 January 1923 – Rome, 21 December 2001) was a Swiss writer.

Biography
Alicia Ceresa, who signed her name Alice, came from a Ticinese family. She moved to Zürich and worked as a journalist with the magazines Die Weltwoche and Svizzera italiana.
It was there she met Luigi Comencini, Franco Fortini, Ignazio Silone, and other Italian expatriates. She moved to Rome in 1950, where she collaborated with the magazines it:Tempo presente and Botteghe Oscure. She also published work with the literary journal Les Lettres Nouvelles.
Ceresa also published translated works, including L’altro processo: le lettere di Kafka a Felice by Elias Canetti, correspondence on the literature of Helmut Heißenbüttel and de:Heinrich Vormweg, the autobiography of the actress Hildegard Knef, L'incredibile storia di Johann il buono and Commedia by Gerold Späth (often through the publishing house Longanesi, who she consulted for).
Her published literary works, although not numerous, were all dedicated to feminist issues and given critical praise. With La figlia prodiga she opened the series for the Einaudi publishing house "La ricerca letteraria" directed by it:Guido Davico Bonino, Giorgio Manganelli and Edoardo Sanguineti, which was awarded the Viareggio Prize in 1967. The book’s experimental dynamism connected it to the feminist movement and the literary group Gruppo '63.
Her books were collected in La figlia prodiga e altre storie, while her Piccolo dizionaria dell’inuguaglianza femminile was released posthumously and edited by Tatiana Crivelli. Her papers were left to the Swiss National Library where, among unedited manuscripts, there are also originals of her correspondence with authors such as Italo Calvino, Dacia Maraini e Elio Vittorini.

Works
Gli altri, in "Svizzera italiana", n. 17-20, Lugano, 1943
La figlia prodiga, Einaudi ("it:La ricerca letteraria" n. 1), Turin, 1967
La morte del padre, in "Nuovi Argomenti", n. 62, April–May 1979, pp. 69–92
Bambine, Einaudi ("Nuovi coralli" n. 423), Torino, 1990, finalist for the Bergamo Prize
La figlia prodiga e altre storie, it:La Tartaruga, Milan, 2004.
Piccolo dizionario dell'inuguaglianza femminile, afterword by it:Jacqueline Risset, Nottetempo, Rome.
La morte del padre, with Ritratto di Alice by it:Patrizia Zappa Mulas, et al., 2013.

References
External links
Alice Ceresa, on hlt-dhs-dss.ch, on the Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Alice Ceresa, on enciclopediadelledonne.it, Enciclopedia delle donne.
Works by Alice Ceresa, on Open Library, Internet Archive.
Publications by and on Alice Ceresa in the Helveticat catalog in the Swiss National Library
Alice Ceresa, on Helveticarchives.ch, Swiss National Library
Interview on Alice Ceresa, on culturactif.ch.
Literary legacy of Alice Ceresa in the Swiss Archive of Literature, on ead.nb.admin.ch
Alice Ceresa's page on the Nottetempo site