Andrew Murray (9 May 1828 – 18 January 1917) was a South African writer, teacher and Christian pastor. Murray considered missions to be "the chief end of the church".[1] Early life and education Andrew Murray was the second child of Andrew Murray Sr. (1794–1866), a Dutch Reformed Church missionary sent from Scotland to South Africa. He was born in Graaff Reinet, South Africa. His mother, Maria Susanna Stegmann, was of French Huguenot and German Lutheran descent.Murray was sent to the University of Aberdeen in Scotland for his initial education, together with his elder brother, John. Both remained there until they obtained their master's degrees in 1845. During this time they were influenced by Scottish revival meetings and the ministry of Robert Murray McCheyne, Horatius Bonar, and William Burns. From there, they both went to the University of Utrecht where they studied theology. The two brothers became members of Het Réveil, a religious revival movement opposed to the rationalism which was in vogue in the Netherlands at that time. Both brothers were ordained by the Hague Committee of the Dutch Reformed Church on 9 May 1848 and returned to the Cape. Murray married Emma Rutherford in Cape Town, South Africa, on 2 July 1856. They had eight children together (four boys and four girls). Residence in Utrecht In 1846 they lived in the Minrebroederstraat (number unknown). From 1847 to 1848 they lived at the Zadelstraat 39. Religious work in South Africa Murray pastored churches in Bloemfontein, Worcester, Cape Town and Wellington, all in South Africa. He was a champion of the South African Revival of 1860. In 1889, he was one of the founders of the South African General Mission (SAGM), along with Martha Osborn and Spencer Walton. After Martha Osborn married George Howe, they formed the South East Africa General Mission (SEAGM) in 1891. SAGM and SEAGM merged in 1894. Because its ministry had spread into other African countries, the mission's name was changed to Africa Evangelical Fellowship (AEF) in 1965. AEF joined with Serving In Mission (SIM) in 1998 and continues to this day. Through his writings, Murray was also a key "Inner Life" or "Higher Life" or Keswick leader, and his theology of faith healing and belief in the continuation of the apostolic gifts made him a significant forerunner of the Pentecostal movement.In 1894, Murray was visited by John McNeill and Rev. J Gelson Gregson, the ex-British Army Chaplain and Keswick convention speaker. Death Murray died on 18 January 1917, four months before his 89th birthday. He was so influenced by Johann Christoph Blumhardt's Möttlingen revival that he included a portion of Friedrich Zündel's biography at the end of With Christ in the School of Prayer. Works A bibliography compiled by D. S. B. Joubert estimates that Murray published over 240 books and tracts; this number includes about 50 books, many of them authored in both Dutch and English, including: Abide in Christ Absolute Surrender Be Perfect Divine Healing God's Will: Our Dwelling Place Holy in Christ How to Raise Your Children for Christ Humility: The Journey Toward Holiness (1884) Let Us Draw Nigh – 1894 Like Christ Money The Deeper Christian Life The Lord's Table The Holiest of All: An Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews The Master's Indwelling The Ministry of Intercession The Power of the Blood of Christ The Prayer Life The School of Obedience The Spirit of Christ The Spiritual Life The True Vine The Two Covenants Thy Will Be Done Waiting on God With Christ in the School of Prayer Working for God! The Dearth of Conversions Jesus Himself Lord Teach Us to Pray Or, The Only Teacher References External links Works by Andrew Murray at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Andrew Murray at Internet Archive Works by Andrew Murray at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Works by Andrew Murray a complete list of over 60 of his English books, in chronological order. List of works by Andrew Murray with links to online and ebook versions. Andrew Murray, Keswick / Higher Life Leader: a Biographical Sketch, in The Doctrine of Sanctification, Thomas D. Ross, Ph.D. dissertation, Great Plains Baptist Divinity School, 2014 True Vine Audio World Invisible Online Library Includes many Murray books Path2Prayer "has a collection of 46 Murray books in pdf form" Short Bio from The Healing and Revival Press Short Bio from the Wellington Museum Andrew Murray Centre in Wellington, South Africa Andrew Murray Bible School in South Africa