Ayodeji Richard Makun (listen), also known by his stage name A.Y, is a Nigerian actor, comedian, radio and TV presenter, writer, producer and film director. Born on 19 August 1971, he hails from Ifon, Ose local government in Ondo State. He is the host of the A.Y live shows and A.Y comedy skits. His first movie, 30 Days in Atlanta was produced by him and directed by Robert O. Peters. He was made a U.N Peace Ambassador. In 2009, he was made United Nations Peace Ambassador. He is also the CEO of Corporate World Entertainment Nigeria. Education Ayo Makun attended Delta State University, Abraka, Delta State, Nigeria. He graduated (after spending nine years) in 2003 as a theatre arts student. A.Y received honors while he was a student, including the Jaycee Club Socio-personality Award, Best Show Business Promoter (2001), Most Celebrated Student on Campus (2001), and Most Fashionable Student on Campus (1999 and 2000). Career Ayo Makun came into spotlight after being Alibaba Akporobome's personal assistant and event manager. He wrote going "A.Y wire" as a guest columnist in The Sun (Nigeria) and Gbenga Adeyinka's "Laugh Mattaz". Personal life Ayo Makun is the oldest male child from a family of seven. He married his wife, Mabel in November, 2008. They are blessed with two children,Michelle Makun and Ayomide Makun. Professional life Ayo Makun directs and acts in one of Nigeria's sitcom, AY's crib with Alex Ekubo, Venita Akpofure, Buchi Franklin, and Justice Nuagbe. He also hosts comedy shows, AY Live featuring comedians like Bovi, Helen Paul, Basketmouth and many other comedians. Ayo Makun is also the Chief Executive Officer of Corporate World entertainment, Nigeria. He also owns a club house. As an investor in stand-up comedy, he has paved the way for upcoming comedians through his AY "Open Mic Challenge". Events He co-hosted at the 2018 Golden Movie Awards Africa held at the Movenpick Ambassador Hotel in Accra, Ghana with Joselyn Dumas. Awards 2008 Comedian of the year: Diamond Awards for Comedy Comedian of the year: Teens Favorite Comedian of the year: MBG Abuja Merit Awards Comedian of the year: National Daily Awards Comedian of the year: Arsenal Award for Excellence Comedian of the year: Mode Men of the year Awards 2009 U.N Peace Ambassador. 2010 Comedian of the year: Nigerian Entertainment Awards 2013 Most creative Entrepreneur of the year, (comedy category): Creative Entrepreneurs Association of Nigeria (CEAN) Best Event A.Y Live: NELAS Awards 2018, United Kingdom Selected filmography See also List of Yoruba people List of Nigerian comedians == References ==