Barun Sengupta (Bengali: বরুণ সেনগুপ্ত) (23 January 1934 – 19 June 2008), the founder-editor of Bartaman newspaper, was a Bengali journalist and popular political critic. He is remembered for his bold and simple diction of political analysing that made him extremely well liked among the common readers in West Bengal.

Life
Son of Nirmalananda Sengupta and Ranibala Devi, Barun Sengupta was born in Barisal (in present-day Bangladesh). Sengupta, along with his family, moved to Kolkata before the partition of India in 1947 and rented a house near Baithakkhana Market in north-central Kolkata.
His education started in B.M. School, Barisal. Later he was admitted to Town School, Kolkata. After graduating in commerce from City College, Kolkata, he founded a periodical named Bhabikal which lasted a few issues. In 1957, he founded another weekly named Bartaman with the aid of Hemanta Kumar Bose, a popular leader of the political party, Forward Bloc. He joined Anandabazar Patrika in 1960 and became its first designated political correspondent in 1965. During the Emergency, he was sent to jail along with another reporter, Gour Kishore Ghosh.In 1984, he left Anandabazar Patrika to start his own journal and launched Bartaman, a daily, on 7 December that year. For its straightforward and intrepid style, the journal became extremely popular among the common Bengali readers. Later Sengupta launched two more periodicals - Saptahik Bartaman, a weekly and Sukhi Grihokon, a monthly and this time too it was a success. These two journals are now widely read in West Bengal.
He died in a south Kolkata nursing home after a brief illness.

Books
He wrote several books on India's political situation. One of his controversial book Indira Ekadashi was based on the 11-year tenure (1966–77) of Indira Gandhi as the Prime Minister of India.

Pala Badaler Pala
Sab Chatitra Kalpanik
Bipak-i-stan
Andhakarer Antaraley
Netajir Antardhan Rahasya

Further reading
Barun Sengupta Rachana Sangraha (Collected Works of Barun Sengupta in Bengali), Ananda Publishers Pvt Ltd, Kolkata - 700009

References
External links
News of Sengupta's Death and a short biography from The Telegraph -[1]
News of Sengupta's Death from Indian Express -[2]
Biography of Barun Sengupta from Yahoo News - [3]