Cherry T. Chevapravatdumrong (; born 1977), also known as Cherry Cheva, is an American author, screenwriter, comedian, and producer. She serves as an executive producer of Family Guy and a co-executive producer of  The Orville and  Resident Alien.

Early life
Chevapravatdumrong, a  Thai American, was born in Columbus, Ohio, and raised in Ann Arbor, Michigan, graduating from Huron High School in 1995. She majored in psychology at Yale University, where she wrote for The Yale Record, Yale's humor magazine. She later earned a Juris Doctor degree from New York University Law School, where she wrote for the comedic Law Revue. During law school, she spent her summers working at law firms and her winter breaks waiting tables at her parents' restaurant.

Career
She then moved to Los Angeles to pursue writing. Before working on Family Guy, she was a writer's assistant on Listen Up! She released two young adult novels, She's So Money and DupliKate, under the name Cherry Cheva.

Family Guy
She is now the only female writer on Family Guy (a fact mentioned in the episode "Roasted Guy"), and also a co-executive producer. Her last name was used in its entirety in the episode "And I'm Joyce Kinney" as the real last name of Joyce Kinney.
In the episode "Jesus, Mary and Joseph!", Peter breaks the fourth wall by rearranging the letters of her name in the opening credits to say "Chemotherapy vanguard vCr" (with one "r" left over, which he throws at Lois in a childlike tantrum when she points this out).
In the episode "Dead Dog Walking", Peter again breaks the fourth wall by saying that her address is 11700 Hollywood Way, North Hollywood, CA 91065, and that she is also a lawyer; this address does not exist. 
In the episode "No Giggity, No Doubt", Peter lists her name among examples of people (mainly other Family Guy characters, increasing in obscurity) who should go on an excursion with Meg: "Cherry Chevapravatdumrong, that's how that name is pronounced."

Episodes
The Orville
She would also work with MacFarlane on The Orville.
"Firestorm" (Season 1, Episode 10)
"Home" (Season 2, Episode 3)
"Sanctuary" (Season 2, Episode 12)
"Mortality Paradox" (Season 3, Episode 3)

Books
It Takes a Village Idiot, and I Married One. Harper. 2007. ISBN 978-0061143328. with Alex Borstein
She's So Money. Harper. 2009. ISBN 978-0061288531.
DupliKate. Harper. 2009. ISBN 978-0061288548.

References
External links
Official website 
Cherry Chevapravatdumrong at IMDb