Claudia Pond Eyley (born 1946) is a New Zealand artist and filmmaker. Her works are held in the collection of the Auckland Art Gallery Toi o Tāmaki and Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.

Early life
Claudia Pond Eyley was born in 1946 in Matamata, New Zealand.

Education
Eyley has studied in Montreal, New York, and at the Auckland University Elam School of Fine Arts. Eyley was a major figure in Kingsland society circles in the 1970s and 1980s.

Career
Art
She is a founding member of Visual Artists Against Nuclear Arms and a member of the Association of Women Artists. She has exhibited widely international and within New Zealand, including:

Guest Artist, N.Z. Society of Sculptors & Painters Show in 1975
Wellington City Art Gallery in 1985
Unruly Practices at the Auckland City Art Gallery in 1993She has completed mural commissions at Stokes Road (1980), Auckland University Arts Commerce (1984), Auckland High Court (1991), and collaborated with Pat Hanly for Flying Colours With Invention, Women's Suffrage Centennial collaborative project at Khartoum Place (1993).

Films
Eyley has directed four films including:

Helen (2013), (co-directed with Dan Salmon) documentary about New Zealand's first elected woman Prime Minister, Helen Clark
Kit & Maynie (2008), documentary about two 90-year-old peace activists who live on Waiheke Island in the Hauraki Gulf of New Zealand
No Nukes Is Good Nukes! The Legacy of New Zealand's Grassroots Ant-Nuclear Movement (2007), documentary about New Zealand's Act of Parliament in 1987 which saw New Zealand become a nuclear free nation
Departure and Return -The Final Journey of the Rainbow Warrior (2006), documentary about Greenpeace's ship, the Rainbow Warrior

Books
Eyley co-authored the book Helen Clark - Inside Stories with Dan Salmon. She has illustrated three children's books with author Maris O'Rouke: Lillibutt's Big Adventure; Lillibut''s Te Araroa Adventure; and Lillibutt's Australian Adventure.

References
Further reading
Artist files for Claudia Pond Eyley are held at:

Angela Morton Collection, Takapuna Library
E. H. McCormick Research Library, Auckland Art Gallery Toi o Tāmaki
Robert and Barbara Stewart Library and Archives, Christchurch Art Gallery Te Puna o Waiwhetu
Fine Arts Library, University of Auckland
Hocken Collections Uare Taoka o Hākena
Te Aka Matua Research Library, Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
Macmillan Brown Library, University of CanterburyAlso see: 

Concise Dictionary of New Zealand Artists McGahey, Kate (2000) Gilt Edge

External links
Official homepage