Danielle Clode is an Australian author of literary nonfiction, history and children's books. Life Clode was born in Adelaide in 1968 and spent her early years in Port Lincoln, South Australia. She later lived on a boat with her parents travelling around Australia and completing her schooling by correspondence.Clode studied politics and psychology at University of Adelaide before completing her PhD in Zoology as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University. She has taught creative and professional writing at universities across Australia and is an associate at Melbourne University and Flinders University. Career Clode is an interdisciplinary scholar who has published widely on conservation biology, psychology, mental health and addiction, fire preparation, history and creative writing. She currently reviews for the Australian Book Review, and her essays and short stories have appeared in Cosmos, Australian Book Review, The Conversation and anthologies.  Clode is a regular speaker at writing festivals and on radio shows, and has featured on international podcasts such as Good Reading Magazine and Yale Podcast Network. She also appeared in a documentary based on her book Killers in Eden, produced and narrated a documentary based on Voyages to the South Seas, and produced a radio play based on In Search of the Woman Who Sailed the World. Distinctions Clode has received the Rhodes Scholarship (South Australia, 1990), the Victorian Premier’s Literary Award for Nonfiction in 2007, a Whitley Award for Best Popular Zoology book in 2017 and was short-listed for a Children’s Book Council Award in 2010 and 2016 as well as numerous writing fellowships. Clode's 2018 biography of Australian naturalist Edith Coleman, The Wasp and the Orchid, was shortlisted for the 2019 National Biography Award. In Search of the Woman Who Sailed the World was shortlisted for the 2022 Adelaide Festival Awards for Literature Nonfiction Award. Bibliography Some of her books are: Koala (Black Inc. 2022)/Koala: A Natural History and Uncertain Future (WW Norton 2023)' John Long: Fossil Hunter (Wild Dingo Press 2021) In Search of the Woman Who Sailed the World (Pan Macmillan 2020) First Wave: Exploring early coastal contact history in Australia (Wakefield Press 2019) (edited with Gillian Dooley) The Wasp and the Orchid: The Remarkable Life of Edith Coleman (Picador 2018) From Dinosaurs to Diprotodons: Australia's Amazing Fossils (Museums Victoria 2018) Killers In Eden: The True Story Of Killer Whales And Their Remarkable Partnership With The Whalers Of Twofold Bay  A Future in Flames  Prehistoric Giants: The Megafauna of Australia  Voyages To The South Seas: In Search Of Terres Australes  Prehistoric Marine Life in Australia's Inland Sea  Continent of Curiosities: A Journey Through Australian Natural History  As If for a Thousand Years References External links Official Website