David Hundeyin is a Nigerian journalist, activist, and author. He founded the West Africa Weekly, a Substack newsletter.

Early life
Hundeyin initially studied mass communications at Igbinedion University before going overseas to study creative writing at the University of Hull and graduating in 2011. After working several jobs including a contract position at KPMG, he returned home to Nigeria in 2013.

Career
Hundeyin is an investigative journalist. His reporting style, at times open-sourced, has won him multiple awards but also earned him criticism. After participating in the #EndSARS protest, he left Nigeria when multiple threats were made against him.

NewswireNGR
In 2020, he wrote an article for NewswireNGR about Globacom and the work conditions and treatment of their Indian expatriate workers. After the story was published, the workers received their owed pay. India Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote Hundeyin a letter of appreciation for his journalism.He also wrote an investigative report about the potential human rights violations coming out of a proposed infectious diseases bill in Nigeria's house of representative addressing the Covid-19 lockdown. This article won Hundeyen a People Journalism Prize for Africa.In 2021, Hundeyin wrote about the rape and death of a 26-year-old woman. The article and several Tweets by Hundeyin alleged that the suspect used a hotel owned by the wife Nigerian politician Godswill Akpabio. Akpabio demanded a retraction from Hundeyin because he believed the publication gave the impression that the couple was complicit in the crime and threatened a lawsuit.

West Africa News
Hundeyin received a grant from Substack Local to start the newsletter, West Africa News, on its platform in 2021.  He attributed this publishing change to the creative and editorial freedom it afforded him. He accused Globacom, a telecom company, of throttling access to the NewswireNGR site after his report came out and said that the website would always get cyberattacks after he writes a story. His newsletter would be delivered to his subscribers directly through email instead.In 2022, Hundeyin published investigative articles on Nigerian presidential candidate Bola Tinubu, tech start-up Flutterwave, and the BBC’s West Africa operations. The reports initiated intense social media conversations between Hundeyin and the subjects of his articles or their supporters.

James Currey Fellowship controversy
In 2022, Hundeyin was announced as The Distinguished James Currey Fellow for 2023 as an academic visitor to the Centre of African Studies at the The University of Cambridge after signing a publishing deal with the founder of the program, Onyeka Nwelue. In March 2023, Hundeyin was dismissed from Cambridge after an investigation to his conduct with Nwelue during his book launch at Oxford University. While Nwelue was accused of misrepresenting himself as an Oxford University professor even though he was an unpaid Academic Visitor, Hundeyin was accused by attendees of the event of making misogynistic and sexist comments. On Twitter, he presented his fellowship as being awarded by Cambridge University even though he was just an academic visitor under Nwelue's now discredited fellowship scheme. Hundeyin later accused Oxford professor Miles Larmer and Kaduna state Governor Nasir el-Rufai, an advisor to Oxford's African Studies Centre, of being behind the accusations and development.

Awards and recognition
• Royal Commonwealth Society "Write Around The World", Class B (14-15 years old) 3rd Prize, 2006• People Journalism Prize for Africa, 2020• GRC & Anti-Financial Crime Reporter of the Year, 2021• James Currey Fellowship, 2023


== References ==