Dorrie K. Fontaine is an American educator, author, dean, and critical care nurse. She is known best for her academic leadership at the University of Virginia School of Nursing.

Biography
Fontaine was born and raised in Charlottesville. She earned a bachelor's degree in nursing from Villanova University in 1972, a master's degree from the University of Maryland in 1977, and subsequently began her career in academia before receiving a PhD from the Catholic University of America.Fontaine served as the fifth dean of the University of Virginia School of Nursing (UVA) for over a decade before retiring in July 2018. While at UVA, she created the Compassionate Care Initiative to help train nurses on providing empathetic care to patients and implemented requirements of interprofessional education among medical and nursing students through course material and training exercises. Fontaine is a past president and member of the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses and has been a fellow of the American Academy of Nursing for over 20 years.

Bibliography
Morton, Patricia; Fontaine, Dorrie; Hudak, Carolyn; Gallo, Barbara (2005). Critical Care Nursing: A Holistic Approach (8th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 9780781727594.
Morton, Patricia; Fontaine, Dorrie (2012). Essentials of Critical Care Nursing: A Holistic Approach. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 9781609136932.

Awards
University of Maryland's Visionary Pioneer Award
2019 Elizabeth Zintl Leadership Award
AACN Pioneering Spirit Award
Presidential Citation from the Society of Critical Care Medicine
2013 Capstone International Nursing Book Award
2019 Healthy Work Environment Award

References
External links
Fontaine, Dorrie • University of Virginia School of Nursing
Nursing Dean Emerita Dorrie K. Fontaine Chosen for 2019 Zintl Leadership Award
Dorrie K. Fontaine – Kosmos Journal
University of Virginia Nursing Dean Emerita Dorrie K. Fontaine selected for 2019 Leadership Award
Dorrie K. Fontaine | HuffPost
Dean Dorrie Fontaine | Semester At Sea
Dorrie K Fontaine's profile on Publons
Dorrie K. Fontaine (Author of Critical Care Nursing) - Goodreads
Award Recognizes UVA Nursing Dean Dorrie Fontaine - AACN