Eileen Kelly (b. August 8, 1995, in Seattle, WA) is an American sex educator, writer, producer, and host of the podcast Going Mental. She has been called the Dr. Ruth of the 21st century and is the founder of the millennial SexEd and relationship blog Killer and a Sweet Thang. Kelly was nominated for a 2018 Shorty Award at the 10th Shorty Awards.

Early life
Kelly was raised by a single father in Seattle, WA and attended Catholic school for primary education. In an interview with Nylon, Kelly said that the social paradox where society was "uber-sexualized" but at the same time was strongly repressive when it came about discussion about sex. She attended the same high school as Amanda Knox.

Work
Kelly started a Tumblr blog, called Birds&Bees, while she was in high school. The blog featured sexual health and relationship advice and discussion and was heavily informed by online research and personal experiences. In 2013, while studying in The New School, she began blogging on Instagram and eventually won the nickname as the Dr. Ruth (after German sex therapist Dr. Ruth Westheimer). In an interview with W, Kelly noted that she had been a victim of cyberbullying and harassment due to the content she posted on Instagram.Kelly started her blog Killer and a Sweet Thang in 2016, eventually sharing management of the site with a staff of writers and contributors. In 2018, Kelly published the book Pull Out, aimed at educating millennials about safe sex practices. She teaches at sex education workshops and awareness campaigns, collaborating with organizations like Women and Youth Supporting Each Other.In 2018, Kelly was nominated at the 10th Shorty Awards in the Activism category for her efforts to carry out public discussions on taboo topics involving sex education.

Going Mental with Eileen Kelly Podcast
In 2019, Kelly launched the podcast Pillow Talk where she interviewed guests on sex and sexuality. She later rebranded the podcast, calling it Going Mental with Eileen Kelly. Guests have included Amanda Knox, Camilla Mendes, Emily Ratajkowski, Dita Von Teese, Alex Cooper, Lil Yachty, Michael Cohen, Tao Lin, amongst others.

Treatment
Prior to creating Going Mental with Eileen Kelly, Eileen spent time at McLean Hospital.

External links
Going Mental


== References ==