Faik Bulut, (born 1950, Kağızman, Kars), is well-known a journalist, historian, writer and political commentator from Turkey, of Kurdish origin. Speaks Turkish, Kurdish, English, Arabic and French. Biography He graduated from Ankara Gazi University in 1980. He started journalism in 1985. He has authored near 40 books ever since.  Currently he is a public commentator for foreign TV channels and publishing columns in Independent Turkish.  His books have been cited 168 times since 2016 and 382 times since 1994 in peer-reviewed academic papers listed in Google Scholar. Views on Marco Polo According to Faik Bulut, what the famous Marco Polo wrote about Order of Assassins does not reflect the truth and what he told in his memoirs:  Hasan Sabbah has turned a valley and has never been in it before. had turned it into a garden full of unseen fruits. The most elegant palaces and mansions imaginable were built in it. And there were gutters where wine, milk, honey and water flowed freely. There were many of the world's most beautiful female concubines who could play all kinds of musical instruments well and sing, dance to enchant the beholder, and they believed that the Muslims of these regions were Paradise. According to Bulut all of the above claims are a 100% false and the opinions of other scientists also support him in this regard. According to Bulut, it has been 15 years since Alamut Castle was destroyed by Mongols at the time Marco Polo claimed to have gone there. German archaeologists, who are conducting archaeological excavations in the region, say that they cannot even find the traces of rivers over which honey, milk or wine flows, concubines and virgins roam, and the castle is not large enough to contain all these. So Bulut emphasizes that Polo's writings are only legends he heard from sailors while in prison in Italy. Journalism As a journalist and political commentator, he has been publishing articles, participating interviews, attending TV & Radio shows, such as CNN, BBC, The Independent Turkish, DW, Sputnik News Turkey, referenced by many authors and post graduation thesis in Turkey and globally. Works Faik Bulut researches on Alevism, Kurds, Palestine State and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Ottoman Empire, Middle East and Islamic History, Islamic Organizations, Secularism, History, Politics, Culture etc. Bulut has authored nearly 40 books and as a scholar he has an h-index of 11, i10-index of 12 while his books has been cited by academic articles and theses 382 times since 1994 according to Google Scholar. Alevism history Alevism without Ali, Berfin Publishing, 2011 Hasan Sabbah Truth and Equalist Dervishan Republics, Berfin Publishing, 2014 Islamic Communists: (Qarmatians) Abu Muslim Khorasani Whose Dormitory is Khorasan? How did We Come From Khorasan: The Road Story of Alevis, 2019 Middle East Fading Colors of the Middle East (Yazidis, Circassians, Bedouins, Nusayris) Palestine Dream (Memoir) Palestine Intifada Lessons Sharia In The Shadow Algeria Iraq Invasion from Arab's Eyes Kurds Kurdish Revolts in the Eye of the State  Kurds in the Turkish Press Seeking a Solution to the Kurdish Question Dersim Reports Three Rebellions in a Narrow Triangle: Ethnic Conflicts in Kurdistan Kurdish Diplomacy (2 volumes) History of the Kurdish Language By the Pen of Ahmede Xane: The Unknown World of the Kurds (Second place in the 1995 Musa Anter Research Award) Islamic and Islamic organizations Democracy in the State of Allah: A Critique of the Sharia Order (1993 Turan Dursun Research Award) Islamist Organizations (3 volumes) Turkish Army and Religion: Islamist Activities in the Eyes of the State (1826 - 2007) Code Name: Hezbollah Who is this Fethullah Gülen? The Rise of Sect Capital 1: Criticism of Islamic economics The Rise of Sect Capital 2: Where does the Sect Capital go? Secrets of Al-Qaeda Religion, Nationalism and Women Debates in Committee of Union and Progress (2 volumes) Islam in the Global Age 1: The Western world and Secularism, Cumhuriyet Books Islam in the Global Age 2: Woman and Hijab, Cumhuriyet Books Islam in the Global Age 3: Sharia and Politics, Cumhuriyet Books Sexual Spells in Islam See also Order of Assassins Yazidis References External links Faik Bulut's articles on History and Politics  on The Independent Turkey (in Turkish)