Fernando María Guerrero Ramírez (May 30, 1873 – June 12, 1929) was a Spanish Filipino, poet, journalist, lawyer, politician, and polyglot who became a significant figure during the Philippines' golden period of Spanish literature, a period ranging from 1890 to the outbreak of World War II in 1940. Biography Guerrero was born to a highly educated family. His father was Lorenzo Guerrero, a painter and art teacher largely known for mentoring gifted artists like Juan Luna, Felix Hidalgo, and Juan Arellano. His mother was Clamencia Ramirez. He began writing literature at a young age. He excelled in the facility of language and obtained his Bachelor of Arts degree from the Ateneo Municipal de Manila and the Bachelor of Laws degree at the University of Santo Tomas and wrote journals during the years 1898 to 1900. He became a lawyer and he taught criminology and forensic oratory. He served as chairman of the board of study at the law school La Jurisprudencia (The Jurisprudence). He also became a councilor, secretary of the senate and secretary of the Philippine Independence commission. He was also a director of the Academia de Leyes (Academy of Regulation). Apart from Spanish, Guerrero spoke Tagalog, Latin, Greek, and English. During the revolution he was recruited by General Antonio Luna to serve as contributor and editor for the newspaper, La Indepencia, together with Rafael Palma and Epifanio de los Santos. During the early years of the American occupation, he would be reunited with Rafael Palma at El Renacimiento (The Rebirth), a Spanish-language daily. In a few years, he would transition from the position of editor to director. Under Guerrero's leadership as its director, El Renaciemento would become the most influential and powerful paper in the Philippines—exposing and speaking against the oppression and brutality of the constabulary. After a brief stint in politics he became an editor at La Vanguardia (The Outer works) and La Opinion (The Opinion). He was a member of the First Philippine Assembly representing Manila's 2nd district, the Academia Filipina (Philippine Academy) and also became a leader of the Municipal Board of Manila. He was also a correspondent to the Royal Academy of the Spanish Language in Madrid. His poetry book Crisálidas was published in 1914. Subsequently, he published another verse compilation called Aves y Flores. Guerrero died on June 12, 1929, coinciding with that year's anniversary of the República Filipina (Philippine Republic). A school in Paco, Manila, was named after him in his honor. Poetry A 1913 poem written by Guerrero: Original in Spanish A Hispania Oh, noble Hispania! Este díaes para ti mi canción,canción que viene de lejoscomo eco de antiguo amor,temblorosa, palpitantey olorosa a tradiciónpara abrir sus alas cándidasbajo el oro de aquel solque nos metiste en el almacon el fuego de tu vozy a cuya lumbre, montando,clavileños de ilusión,mi raza adoró la gloriadel bello idioma español,que parlan aún los Quijotesde esta malaya región,donde quieren nuevos Sanchos, que parlemos en sajón. English translation To SpainO, Noble Spain!  Today This song is for thee A song that comes from afar Like an old love Trembling, palpitating Fragrant with tradition Opening its candid wings Under the goldness of that sun of yours Which we've received into our souls With the fire of thy voice In whose brightness ride The stallions of hope. My race adored the glory Of the beauty of the Spanish tongue That is spoken by the Quixotes From this Malay region, Where new Sanchos would like that we instead spoke in Saxon tongue. See also Lourdes Castrillo Brillantes José Rizal Ilustrado References External links Fernando María Guerrero - A Colossus in Philippine Spanish Literature