Gail Tremblay (born 1945) is an American writer and artist with Mi'kmaq and Onondaga ancestry who lives in Washington State. She is well known for weaving baskets from film strips that depict stereotypical subject matter of Native Americans, such as western movies and anthropological documentaries.  She received a Washington State Governor's Arts and Heritage Award in 2001. Background Tremblay was born on December 15, 1945 in Buffalo, New York. She received her BA in drama from the University of New Hampshire and an MFA in English (Creative Writing) from the University of Oregon, Eugene in 1969. Writing and education career Tremblay was a faculty member at The Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington and taught courses in English, art history, and Native American Studies. She began her faculty appointment at Evergreen in 1980 and retired in 2016. In writing she is largely known for poetry. Tremblay also writes essays about other artists for exhibition catalogues and books. She wrote the catalogue essay, "Speaking in a Language of Vital Signs," for the 2008 exhibition catalogue, Joe Feddersen: Vital Signs at the Hallie Ford Museum of Art at Willamette University. Visual art Tremblay combines traditional techniques and materials with contemporary artistic expression, such as her woven pieces and baskets, created from experimental materials such as exposed film. Her poetry and art is inspired by her cultural heritage, sometimes drawing on traditional Native American motifs. In a 2021 published interview with art historian Cathy Denning, Tremblay said that the motivation for her work is, "I am a Native person using my own tribal lens to comment on what I see happening at this moment in the world where I live."Her aunts taught her basketry techniques and forms which she reinterpreted through the use of film stock and film leader as materials. Tremblay's art draws from Native American history, Indigenous cosmologies, literature, Western movies, and other pop culture references. For example, she created a basket using red and white film leader entitled, And Then There's the Business of Fancydancing, inspired by Sherman Alexie's film, The Business of Fancydancing (2002), where the main character, a Spokane man, has a love relationship with a white man. As she said, "I chose to use Porcupine Stitch because there are so many difficult and prickly relationships between characters in this film.” Tremblay's woven basket work with film also includes When will the Red Leader Overshadow Images of the 19th Century Noble Savage in Hollywood Films that Some Think are Sympathetic to American Indians (2018), a basket woven using 35mm film from the movie Windwalker (1981), which was acquired by the Smithsonian American Art Museum in 2021.Artweek reviewer Marcia Morse writes, “Gail Tremblay addresses the troubled history of her own indigenous heritage in And Then There is The Hollywood Indian Princess (2002). Using the Fancy Stitches of Iroquois basketry, Tremblay–instead of the traditional ash splint and sweet grass–has used recycled 16 mm leader and film on sexually transmitted diseases, elegantly subverting multiple stereotypes.” Exhibitions Tremblay has staged many solo exhibitions and participated in numerous group shows. Her notable solo shows include Gail Tremblay: Fiber, Metal, Wood (1988), Museum of the Plains Indian, Browning, Montana; The Empty Fish Trap Installation (2004), Evergreen State College Gallery, Olympia, Washington; Gail Tremblay: Twenty Years of Making (2002), Daybreak Star Cultural Center, Seattle; Reframing Images, Conceptualizing Indigenous Art (2013), Froelick Gallery, Portland, Oregon; and Art of Gail Tremblay (2017), Eastern Washington University Downtown Gallery, Cheney, Washington. Notable works in public collections Publications Night Gives Women the Word (Omaha Printing Company, 1979) Close to Home (University of Nebraska, 1981) Indian Singing in 20th Century America (CALYX Books, 1990) Farther From and Too Close to Home (CreateSpace Independent Publishing, 2013) == References ==