Helen Kim (also Kim Hwal-lan, 1899 – 1970) was a South Korean politician, educator, social activist, and feminist.  Her pen name was Wuwol(우월;又月). Kim is the founder of the daily Korean newspaper, The Korea Times.

Biography
Kim was born in Incheon to a large, modern family. She attended Christian schools as a girl. She attended Ewha Girls School. Between graduating from Ewha, she "established the national YWCA Korea" in 1922. Then she went to Wesleyan College where she earned her bachelor's degree in 1924. Kim went to Boston University for a master's in philosophy (1931) and then received her PhD in education from Columbia University in 1931.Kim later became dean of a girls' college (Ewha College) in 1931. By the time of her death, this school will have become the largest women's university in the world.Kim was involved with Kŭnwuhwoe, which was a national women's organization that was dedicated to ending the "remaining Korean feudal practices and beliefs as well as colonial constraints." However, she didn't stay involved for long because she was "unwilling to work with women who were Marxists and socialists."In 1945, Kim, O Ch'ǒn-sǒk, Yu Ŏk-kyǒm and Paek Nak-chun formed the Korean Committee on Education. This committee worked with the United States in the Education Bureau, making recommendations about schools and their staff.Kim became director of the Office of Public Information for President Syngman Rhee in 1948. In 1949, she attended the United Nations General Assembly in Boston. As the director of the Office of Public Information, she recommended that an English newspaper was needed. She chose the name of the paper, deciding that The Korea Times was the best name for representing the whole country. The newspaper was published on November 1, 1950.

Controversy
Kim is a controversial figure because of her involvement in activities that were considered "pro-Japanese" during the Japanese occupation of Korea. As the principal of Ehwa, she used her position to inspire others to encourage the men in their lives to join the military draft for the Japanese army. Kim herself justified her actions as "necessary in order to keep Ewha open under harsh colonial policies" and could also be seen as consistent with Methodist Church teachings (Kim's religion). Kim continues to be an agent of controversy, with her effigy being burned and students protesting her statue.

References
External links
Helen Kim (1899–1970) : Columbia University
김활란:대한민국 학술원 (in Korean)
Helen Kim
Helen Kim