Ikhide Roland Ikheloa is a Nigerian writer and literary critic who has worked in the American civil service since 1984. Early Life Ikhide Ikheloa was born in Ikeja Barracks, Lagos on February 14th 1959. His father was an itinerant policeman and his mother, a typist at the Lagos immigration office. As a result of his father’s occupation, he was often transferred to different places across Southern Nigeria. And so Ikhide’s childhood was divided between different parts of Southern Nigeria. Career Ikhide Ikheloa is a writer, widely known as a literary and social critic. He describes himself more as a writer who reads. But the common perception of him is of a writer who is a critic. His nonfiction pieces have been published in world renowned magazines like Guernica and Ecclectica; his political opinion pieces have been published in Independent UK, and the defunct NEXT newspaper which he claims to have written 150 pieces for in 3 years. He has also written extensively for African Writer, Brittle Paper and other important African literary magazines. Ikhide is one of the most influential literary and social critics in Anglophone Africa. His essays on novels by African writers are widely read, and his opinions on books have often caused a stir in the literary world, including brief face-offs between him and the authors. In 2017, Ikhide’s essay on Fiston Mwanza Mujila’s Tram 83, changed the conversation around the book forever. Tram 83, having won the 2015 Etisalat Prize for Literature and been described by the Guardian as “the African novel wowing the literary world,” it looked set to become a classic before Ikhide published an essay on his blog, pointing out the book’s misogyny and inadequate portrayal of Africans as people who only eat, drink and have sexual intercourse. After a long argument which took place for days between some of Africa’s biggest literary names including Tsitsi Dangarembga, Petina Gappah, Zukiswa Wanner, Bwesigye Wa Mugire, Richard Oduor Oduku, the conversation around the book changed forever. Ikhide is not just widely read, but prolific, and has arguably written on more books than any other critic since the past two decades. Ikhide also writes on politics, and it was in the political upheavals in Nigeria in the 1990s that his writing found life again after he became a political activist. In the 1990s, after having lived in America for a decade, Ikhide linked up with a few friends and big wigs, including Wole Soyinka, Beko Ransome Kuto, in a platform known as NetNaija to fight for Abiola’s stolen mandate. They would write and organise conferences, and even travel in the process. During Abacha’s regime, he was a frequent guest at Radio Kudirat, one of the effective initiatives formed in Nigeria at the time to combat tyranny. He has since continued to write about politics, citing that when his friends entered into politics in 1998, he stayed back because he believed some of them should stay back to hold folks accountable. Movements Ikhide has been known to champion the authentic African narrative, often willing to draw his dagger on writers and prizes which force writers to write in a certain way. In 2011, he criticised the Caine Prize for African Literature suggesting that "The creation of a prize for 'African writing' may have created the unintended effect of breeding writers willing to stereotype Africa for glory. The mostly lazy, predictable stories that made the 2011 shortlist celebrate orthodoxy and mediocrity.... The problem now is that many writers are skewing their written perspectives to fit what they imagine will sell to the West and the judges of the Caine Prize...." In 2014, at the height of the build-up to the General elections in 2015, Ikhide fell out of favour with a large part of the literary society in Nigeria for fiercely opposing writers and literary community who supported General Muhammadu Buhari’s Presidency. In 2017, he called for the boycotting of the Kaduna Books and Arts Festival (KABAFEST) in its inaugural year on the grounds that its host, Mallam. Nasir El Rufai was responsible for the about 70 Shi’ite Muslims who were killed and buried in mass graves in Kaduna.Ikhide is a well known champion for telling stories on digital platforms. He believes that the internet is the future of storytelling and has often said the book as we know it is dead, but ideas (as in the internet) lives.He has been described by Alexander Fyfe as one of the most visible online critics whose contribution to the literary discourse online has led to the increasing visibility of African literature in the internet. In September 2022, at the James Currey Festival at Oxford University, England, Ikhide Ikheloa, during his acceptance speech of the Lifetime Achievement Award for literary criticism, advocated for more digital publishing opportunities in Nigeria. Ikhide has once participated in the Esan collective which was held online, an attempt to help the condition of plummeting Esan speakers. Awards In September 2022, Ikhide Ikheloa was honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award in literary criticism at the James Currey Literary festival held at Oxford University, England. References 