Inayatullah (1920 - 1999) was a Pakistani novelist, story writer, and the founding editor of monthly Hikayat Digest.

Early life
Inayatullah was born in a Rajput family on November 1, 1920, in Gujar Khan, Punjab, British India. In 1936, he passed his matriculation examination and joined British army as a clerk. He was in an infantry unit of the British army and fought at Burma front against Japan. In 1944, Inayatullah was taken prisoner by the government of Japan, but he managed to flee from the prison. Then he again joined the British army and was sent by the authorities to Malaysia to counter the rebellions.
After the partition of India, Inayatullah joined the Pakistan Air Force as a corporal. In 1965, when the war started between Pakistan and India, he became a war correspondent.

Writing career
Inayatullah started his career as an editor of the monthly Sayyara digest. He later founded his own publishing house, Maktabae Daastan. In 1970, Inayatullah began publishing a monthly magazine called Hikayat Digest from Lahore. Inayatullah was drawn to writing historical books during the time. He also wrote historical novels, hunting stories, and detective fiction in addition to his editorial job. He also wrote about general psychology, biography, politics, and social evils in his essays.
He published over a hundred works under the pen names Meem Alf, Iltumsh, Ahmad Yar Khan, Sabir Hussain Rajput, Waqas, Mehdi Khan, and Gumnaam Khatoon, along with his original name Inayatullah.

Books
Historical novels
Andalus Ki Naagin
Aur Neel Behta Raha - 2 volumes
Firdaus-e-Iblees - 2 volumes
Dastaan Eemaan Faroshon Ki - 5 volumes
Damishq Ke Qaid Khanay Main
Doob Doob Kar Ubhri Nao
Hijaaz ki Aandhi
Aur Aik Boot Shikan Paida Huwa - 4 volumes
Shamsheer-e-Bay Niyaam - 2 volumes
Sitaara Jo Toot Gaya
Ameer Taimoor
Azaadi ya Jung k Hero

Other novels
2 Pullon Ki Kahani
4 Dewari Ke Dareechon Say
Aik Kahaani
Main Gunahgar To Nahin
Khaki Wardi Lal Lahoo
BRB Behti Rahay Gi
Akhiyan Meet Ke Sapna Takya
Fateh Garh Se Farar
Badar Say Batapur Tak
4 Deewari Ki Dunya
Choti Behan Ka Pagla Bhai
Hamari Shikast Ki Kahani
Hamzad ka Ishq
Parcham Urhta Raha
Jurm Jang Or Jazbaat
Heeray Ka jigger
Kala Burqa Jal RahaTha
Lahore Ki Dehleez Per
Main Buzdil Tha Aur Wo Mar Gaya hay Tum Zinda Raho
Main Kisi Ki Beti Nahi
Manzil Aur Musafir
Pakistan Aik Payaz Aur Do Rotian
Panchveen Larki
Raat ka Rahi
Patan Patan Kay Paapi
Payasi Roohen
Piyasay
Tahira
Uljhay Rastay
Ustani Aur Taxi Driver
Wajida Veena Aur Watan

Death
Inayatullah died on November 16, 1999, in Lahore at the age of 79.


== References ==