JuJu Chan Szeto (Chinese: 司徒鈺芸; born 2 February) also known as JuJu Chan (Chinese: 陳鈺芸), is a Hong Kong-born American actress, martial artist, singer, and writer. Chan pursued martial arts at a young age, an interest she kept up with into adulthood. She started modeling when she was a teenager, and entered the film industry after receiving her master's degree from NYU Tisch School of the Arts. Chan received wider recognition as Silver Dart Shi in Netflix's Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny (2016). She later returned to Netflix as Zan in Wu Assassins (2019). Her fans sometime refer to her as the "female Bruce Lee". Early life and education Chan was born in Hong Kong. At the age of three, she moved to the United States and settled in San Francisco.She began to learn martial arts at the age of 10. She first started in judo, as that was the closest school at the time, and went on to learn Shotokan karate, wushu, Hung Ga, Wing Chun, ITF Taekwondo, nunchaku, and muay Thai.Chan graduated from the University of San Francisco with a bachelor’s degree in computer science and mathematics, with honors .She gained a master's degree from NYU Tisch School of the Arts. Entertainment career In August 2009, Chan participated in the RTHK reality series Rich Mate Poor Mate (Chinese: 窮富翁大作戰), where four participants from wealthy backgrounds experience the lives of the not so fortunate. During the 120-hour experience, Chan (nicknamed "The Beauty Queen") has to live the life of a single immigrant mother in Hong Kong while taking care of her eight-year-old boy.Chan starred as the title character in the 2009 web series Lumina, written and directed by Jennifer Thym. She has one of the lead roles, Ping Wei, the head concubine, in the thriller Palace of the Damned (previously named The Living Dead) in 2012. Chan also played the lead actress, Pixie Ho, in an Australian-Chinese Production, Hit Girls, an action comedy short film.Chan starred as Silver Dart Shi in Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny directed by Yuen Woo Ping. Chan was the lead actress in Savage Dog released in July 2017. In August 2018, it was announced that Chan was cast as a recurring character on the Netflix series, Wu Assassins (2019). She played Triad lieutenant Zan Hui. It was announced in February 2021 that she would reprise her role in the sequel film, Fistful of Vengeance. It was later released on 17 February 2022.In June 2019, Chan joined Dimitri Logothetis's martial arts thriller Jiu Jitsu (2020). Martial arts career In 2013 she represented Hong Kong in the Taekwon-Do (ITF) World Championship in Bulgaria. Pageant career In July 2009, she participated in the United Nations Pageants International in Jamaica, where she won Miss Congeniality and Miss United Nation International Ambassador. Music Discography I Wanna Hold Your Heart (2011)Release date: 5 December 2011Songs： 那些年的我們 好勝 瞬間救地球 I Wanna Hold Your Heart Music awards 2011 – Hong Kong Metro Radio New Singer Award (2011年度新城勁爆頒獎禮 – 新城勁爆新登場海外歌手) 2011 – Hong Kong uChannel Teens most favorite new singer Award (2011uChannel我撐起樂壇頒獎禮 – 我最喜愛女新人獎) Other work In 2010, Chan became the spokesperson and ambassador of Heroes2, a charity organization which focuses on reforestation throughout the areas of rural China.Chan has also written her first semi-autobiography To Live a Beautiful Life, releasing it in June 2010. Her second book, published in 2013, is a guide to Western dining called "Food and Ordering at a Restaurant". Personal life She has a twin sister. On 1 October 2019, Chan married frequent collaborator Antony Szeto in Los Angeles. Filmography Television Bibliography Notes References External links JuJu Chan Szeto on Instagram JuJu Chan Szeto on Twitter JuJu Chan Szeto on Facebook JuJu Chan at IMDb