Khristo Poshtakov (Bulgarian: Христо Пощаков) (b. September 22, 1944) is a Bulgarian short story author and novelist. Biography Khristo Poshtakov was born in Pavlikeni, a town in the northern central part of Bulgaria. In 1974, he graduated from the Technical University of Sofia as a mechanical engineer. His later work occupations include acting as a technical advisor at the Ministry of Food Industry in Havana, Cuba, from 1979 till 1984; director of a holding company and later a bus company in Bulgaria; deputy-chairman of the Board of Directors of Balkan Pres AD Ltd. in Sofia. Up to 1998, Poshtakov worked as a translator for the Sara Translation House in Sofia. He retired officially in 2008, but has kept producing translations and writing his own works. He was the first chairman of the Bulgarian Fantastika Foundation, representing Bulgarian science fiction fandom worldwide. Bibliography Khristo Poshtakov's literary endeavours revolve mostly around hard science fiction. So far, he has had four novels and over 130 short stories published in various Bulgarian magazines, newspapers and anthologies. Some of his fiction and essays have been translated into English, Spanish, Russian, French, Dutch, Romanian, Greek, Italian, Hungarian and Portuguese and published in more than ten countries around the globe. Notable publications in Bulgaria 1993, „Дежурство на Титан“ (A Duty on Titan), a collection of short stories and novelettes 1996, „Приключения в Дарвил“ (Adventures in Darville), a novel and short stories 1997, „Нашествието на грухилите“ (The Gruchils' Invasion), a novel 2003, „Меч, мощ и магия“ (Sword, Might and Magic), under the alias of Christopher Postman, a novel 2004, „Генератор на реалности“ (Generator of Realities), a collection of short stories and novelettes 2008, „Завладяването на Америка“ (The Conquest of America), a novel 2011, „Инвазия“ (Invasion), a collection of short stories and novelettes Notable translations 2004, "Ce n'est que justice, Botkine!" (French translation of „Така е справедливо, Боткин!“, a short story), Utopiae 2004, France 2005, „Меч, магия и челюсти“ (Russian translation of „Меч, мощ и магия“), Russia 2006, Industria, luz y magia (Spanish translation of „Меч, мощ и магия“), Spain 2006, La transformación (collection of short stories translated into Spanish), Spain 2006, "Ten Thousand Dollars More" (English translation of „Още десет хиляди долара“, a novelette), Oceans of the Mind, USA 2006, "Development of science fiction and fantasy in Bulgaria" (English translation of „Развитие на българската фантастика“, an overview), Phantazm (A Dutch e-zine), Denmark 2009, „Гаси Америку“ (Russian translation of „Завладяването на Америка“), Russia Honors In 1994, Poshtakov received the Eurocon award for his collection „Дежурство на Титан“ (A Duty on Titan) in Timișoara, Romania. External links Brief overview of Khristo Poshtakov's role in Bulgarian SF Several English translations of Poshtakov's short stories