Kieran Finnane is a journalist and writer based in Alice Springs in the Northern Territory. She is one of the founding journalists of Alice Springs News and has written non-fiction books.

Early life and education
Finnane studied arts and film studies at the University of Sydney and the University of Paris (Panthéon-Sorbonne). Following the completion of her studies she worked in television before moving to Alice Springs in 1987.

Career
In 1994 Finnane and husband Erwin Chlanda founded the Alice Springs News, and it soon became the largest circulation independent newspaper in the Northern Territory. In 1997 the newspaper shifted from printed to online publication and became the Alice Springs News Online.Finnane has been a regular contributor to other publications around Australia, including Art Monthly Australasia, Artlink, Griffith Review, Inside Story, and The Saturday Paper.

Books
In 2016 Finnane published her first book Trouble: on Trial in Central Australia. This book examines the complexities of life in Alice Springs, particularly the Alice Springs Town Camps, and what is revealed in the criminal court. The book attempts to dispassionately present the horrors of crimes committed in Central Australia, and is particularly focused on the violence of  Aboriginal men under the influence of alcohol, towards their wives, brothers and cousins and others. It was well-reviewed by journalist Barry Hill, who wrote: "Trouble is reporting in the liberal, Western mode at its best. It seeks to be compassionate, full of right love, you might say, but the love is conducted without falling into sentimentality, on the one hand, or in defensive historical polemic, on the other".Finnane's second book, Peace Crimes: Pine Gap, national security and dissent was published in August 2020. It looks at the closely-guarded and secretive military facility called Pine Gap, close to Alice Springs, with a particular focus on the arrest of the Peace Pilgrims, non-violent activists.

Recognition
Finnane won Watch This Space's annual Lofty Award in 2013 for her contribution to arts writing and criticism in Central Australia.In October 2020 Finanne talked about her life in a Desert Tracks interview with ABC Alice Springs journalist Emma Haskin, where she talks about her life in the Red Centre and meeting her husband Erwin Chlanda.

Footnotes


== References ==