Matija Bećković (Serbian Cyrillic: Матија Бећковић, pronounced [mǎtija bětɕkoʋitɕ]; born 29 November 1939) is a Serbian poet, writer and academic.

Life
Bećković was born in Senta, in the multiethnic province of Vojvodina (then Danube Banate, Kingdom of Yugoslavia), to a military family of Montenegrin Serbs. Bećković's father Vuk was an officer in the Royal Yugoslav Army, and during World War II the commander of the Rovci Chetnik Battalion and as such, one of the commanders of the leader of the Montenegrin Chetniks, Pavle Đurišić. His father was killed in 1945.He graduated from the Valjevo Gymnasium in Valjevo in 1958. It was during his gymnasium years in Valjevo that he published his first poem, in the journal 'Mlada Kultura'. Furthermore, it was also in Valjevo that Bećković met Vera Pavladoljska, to whom the poem of the same name, published in 1960, was dedicated. Bećković went on to marry Pavladoljska, and he remained married to her until her death.
Upon graduating from the Valjevo gymnasium, he entered the University of Belgrade, graduating with a degree in Yugoslav and world literature. He became a corresponding member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts in 1983, becoming a full member in 1991.
Bećković is a close friend of Serbian former Prime Minister Vojislav Koštunica, and an active supporter of his Democratic Party of Serbia.He has been living in Belgrade since 1960. On the Montenegrin independence referendum, 2006, Bećković did not have a right to vote since he lives in Serbia. However, as a prominent Serb nationalist he fiercely advocated against Montenegrin independence, actively supporting the State Union during the pre-referendum campaign.
In April 2022, Bećković signed a petition calling for Serbia not to impose sanctions on Russia after it invaded Ukraine.

Poetic style
A distinguishing feature of Bećković's poetry is its regionalism. Distinctly Serbian archaic dialect and phraseology permeate his work. This aspect of his work is most often lost when one reads it in translation.

Awards and recognitions
Grand Cross of the Order of the White Eagle, 2007
Order of Saint Sava
Order of Marko Daković
Radoje Domanović Award
Marko Miljanov Award, Montenegro
Milan Rakić Award
Desanka Maksimović Award
Njegoš's Award
Marko Miljanov Award, Montenegro
Felix Romuliana Award
Honorary citizen of Subotica
October Award
7 July Award
Prosveta Award
Duško Trifunović Award
Vinaver's wreath
Velika povelja Brankovog kola

Works
References
Bećković, Matija. Izabrane Pesme i Poeme. Belgrade: Bigz, 1990.
Petković, Novica. "Twentieth century literature". Essays on Modern Serbian Bards. Ralph Bogert, Ed. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006.

External links

Bećković's poems at the South Slavic Library - Mostly in Serbo-Croat, one English translation.
Translated works by Matija Bećković
MATIJA BECKOVIC at royalfamily.org