Milovan Vitezović (Serbian Cyrillic: Милован Витезовић; 11 September 1944 – 22 March 2022) was a Serbian writer, professor and screenwriter. He wrote poems, novels, essays, prose literature for children, reviews, aphorisms, movies and TV scripts. He published more than forty books and was represented in over fifty various anthologies. His aphorisms were published in a series of European newspapers, such as the Hamburg Stern and Moscow's Sunday Times, and translated into Greek, Romanian, Hebrew, Swedish and Italian. Vitezović was one of the few Serbian and Yugoslav contemporary writers, whose books were banned and even burned in its first edition – the collection of aphorisms Srce me je otkucalo. His satirical texts were often published in the Serbian magazine Jež (Hedgehog). He is the author of numerous television dramas and series, texts for theatrical performances and film scripts. Biography Vitezović was born in Vitezovići at Kosjerić on 11 September 1944. He was educated in Tubić, Kosjerić, Užice and Belgrade, where he graduated from the University of Belgrade Faculty of Philology, department of general literature, and Faculty of Dramatic Arts, department of movies and TV scripts. He was editor of operating in Književne novine (Literary Newspaper). In the youth magazine Susret omladine (Youth Meeting), he worked as an editor for literature until 1969, and since then as the editor of the journal Čivija (Pins). He was the editor of a feature series on RTS from 1977 to 1991, when he became the editor-in-chief of the RTS Arts and Entertainment Program. He was a member of the Association of Writers of Serbia (and its president from 2018) and the Serbian PEN Center and he also spoke and wrote for Nacionalna revija (National Review), a magazine on the national heritage of Serbia. In 2001, he became an associate professor at the Academy of Arts, Belgrade. Literary work As narrator, the flow of actions leads insensibly, spontaneous and full of humor a custom situation, characterized by the developed part of fabulom anecdotal narration, fully describing atmosphere time on any deals. The range of his work is very wide, from historical figures and events, through the fictional characters of our time, to youth readings that represent chronicle youth, all of us. In his works not only provide insight into the life and world figures, but pictures of different areas, giving a general picture of space and time. His works can be found in school curricula along with German high school textbooks. As guest editor of the Department of Textbooks and Teaching Aids, capital items in the edition edited by the selected pieces of Bogdan Popović, Jovan Skerlić, Milan Kašanin and Stojan Novaković. Selected novels Professor Kosta Vujić's Hat Barking at the Stars Milena from Knez Mihailova Sveta ljubav Hajduk Veljko Petrović The European Prince Miloš The Socks of King Peter Aphorisms Man, get angry, The heart beat me TV dramas and series Where The Yellow Lemon Blooms Kingdom of Serbia The Principality of Serbia Dimitrije Tucović Vuk Karadžić Then Lola invents slogans Student Age Snohvatice I-II Film scripts Extramarital Planner Branislav Nušić Lotus, life, death, Filip Filipovic Barking at the Stars King Peter of Serbia, co-writer Awards He received numerous awards of which the most important: Zmaj Children Games (1978) Great Charter Bazjaške in Bucharest in 2005, Kočića Award (2005) - Republika Srpska, Golden Gašino pen (2006), Public Voice Award Meša Selimović the second place (2000). He was a candidate for the Anthology of the world's best satirist, which was published in the United States 2007. The Novi Sad June 2007, went to his honor to receive Zmajev poetic rod and open Zmaj Children Games, the largest festival of children's creativity in Europe. Adaptation of his novel Barking at the Stars won the prestigious award domestic Golden Arena Novi Sad and the award in Herceg Novi. He was awarded the Sretenje Order by the Republic of Serbia. References External links Milovan Vitezović at IMDb Books by Milovan Vitezović