Mohsen Ayed Hammoud Sultan, known as Tahish HAWBAN (Arabic: محسن عايض) is an author, journalist and human rights activist. He was born in Yemen in 1976 in isolation Tbahah, Ta'izz Governorate. Qualifications Bachelor of Agriculture – University of Sanaa . Computer Diploma from the Institute of Teacher Education . Diploma in civil society . Diploma in Business Administration . Diploma in Applied Software . Diploma in Accounting . Diploma in Marketing and art sales . Courses in civil society and the media and the democratic transformation and remote training and open education . Novels His novel entitled victims Current workplace Newspaper editor Tahish HAWBAN . Coach programs qualitative sector training and rehabilitation ministry of Education Previous jobs Executive Director of the Institute for the Development of Yemeni democracy. Executive Director of the Future Movement .Currently is writing a novel titled " victims Life Journalist Mohsen Ayed is one of the most controversial journalists in Yemen because of his opinion in the political and religious issues Because of his revolution against the veil, customs and traditions in Yemen Journalist Mohsen Ayed announced his revolution on the customs and traditions of Yemen and has published his picture with his wife in intimate way His wife also was not wearing the Islamic veil and the effects of this act angered many clerics and Islamist fanatics in Yemen Takfir Fatwas In February 2012 issued a religious figure against 69 clerics in Yemen fatwas atone accuse him of blasphemy in which the clergy and offended Islam and the divine Contributed to these fatwas to differentiate between him and his wife and children Asked his wife Khula him because he left the Islamic religion To do so based on these fatwas issued against clerics in Yemen They also made life fatwas journalist Mohsen Ayed danger But here he was gentle with great sympathy and said five Yemeni women desire to marry him in such a crisis that was going through. References 