Mulenga Jestina Mulenga (born 1987) is a Zambian painter, writer, sculptor and photographer.Mulenga is a freelance female artist on the Zambia Art scene. She has been practicing her artistic on a professional level since 2009. Mulenga is a painter, sculptor, writer and photographer. She holds an Art & Design Diploma from Evelyn Hone College of Commerce and Applied Arts. She also has a particular interest in art administration, and currently she is a committee member of the Insaka International Artists Trust (IIAT) and works in the Insakartists Office. Her works can be easily be identified by the palette knife marks and the use of raw colours. Currently she is practising her artistic skills at the Art Academy Without Walls (AAWW) Studio in Lusaka, Zambia. Early years and education Mulenga was born in 1987 in Lusaka, Zambia. She attended the Evelyn Hone College of Applied Arts and Commerce where she acquired a diploma in Art and Design. She became an Asiko International School Alumni under CCA Lagos in 2015 and in 2016, she attended the summer school at International Summer Academy of fine Arts in Salzburg, Austria. Career Mulenga began her professional career in art in 2009. She currently works at the Art Academy Without Walls (AAWW) Studio in Lusaka, Zambia. Mulenga J Mulenga paused for a picture on her Artwork during her early days of career She is a committee member of the Insaka International Artists Trust (IIAT) and a member of Triangle International Network Trust. Her works are characterised by the palette knife marks and the use of raw colours. She has exhibited her work both locally and internationally, including at Tupelo International Artists Workshop Exhibition in Cape Town, Dak’Art Biennale and Gallery of Small Things both in Senegal. Other locations where her work has been exhibited include Seychelles, Zimbabwe and South Africa.She was named an Artist in Residence at Grassworks. In 2019, she won the Ngoma Award for Most Outstanding Female Visual Artist. References 