Acharya Rajendrasuri was a Svetambara Jain monk and reformer of monk traditions of the 19th century. He wrote many books on Jainism including अभिधान राजेंद्र कोष

Early life
Acharya Rajendrasuri was born to businessman Rishabhadas Parakh and Keshardevi. His birth name was Ratna Raj. He was born on 3 December 1827. He had 1 sister and 1 brother  at Bharatpur, Rajasthan.

Ascetic life
He was initiated as a Jain yati (a Jain monk who stays in the same place) by Hemavijay at Udaipur on Vaishakh Shukla 5 Vikram Samvat 1904 (in 1848 CE) and given a new name, Ratnavijay. He was the first yati initiated in the 19th century. Later his name was changed to Rajendrasuri upon his elevation to acharya rank.He studied under Pramodsuri and Jain yati monk Sagarchand. Dharanendrasuri, impressed by his scholarship, appointed him as his daftari. Ratnavijay was disappointed with the luxurious life of Dharanendrasuri and left him in 1864 AD. Later he became the leader of Tapa Gaccha.He led a movement in 1880 to reform yati tradition at Jaora, resulting in near extinction of it. He opposed the luxurious life of the Jain yatis, contradictory to Jain principles of non-possession and non-violence. He issued a nine-point manifesto known as Nav-kalama. He explained nine principles to reform Jain yati tradition. His manifesto was accepted after some initial opposition. Many leading yati and monks gave up their luxurious life and started following Jain principles. He established Agama or Samakit Gaccha, later known as Tristutik Gaccha.He restored and reconstructed some Jain temples and consecrated 1023 icons of Tirthankaras. He visited Rajasthan and Malwa where he delivered religious discourses in Malwi, Marwari languages. He also opposed worship of other gods and goddesses over the worship of Tirthankars.Rajendrasuri died on 21 December 1906 (Vikram Samvat 1963 Pous Shukla Saptami) at Mohankheda, Dhar, Madhya Pradesh. Later, Mohankheda became a centre for learning and a tirtha around 1940.

Works
Rajendrasuri wrote, collected and edited some Jain works. He compiled the Prakrit dictionary, Abhidhānarājaindrakōśa, in seven volumes with 9,200 pages describing 60,000 terms.His works include:
Abhidhānarājaindrakōśa
Prakrit Vyakruti (Commentary on Grammar)
Kalpasutra Prabodhini (Commentary on the Kalpasutra)
Khartar Taskar Prabandh (Unpublished)
Bhagawati Sutra Sateek
Gachchhar Payanna
Terapanth Prashnottar Vichara
Mahanishitha Sutra (fifth)
Brahata sangrihani
Upasaka Dashanga Sutra
Prakrit Shabda Rupawali
Deepmalika Katha (Story of Diwali)
Holika Katha (Story of Holi)
Gandhara vad
Karma Vichar (Unpublished)
Tatva Vichar (Unpublished)
Kalpasutra Balavabodh
Jinupadesh Manjiri
Kalyanmandir Stotra (Commentary)
Jyotirya Kalpalata
Swarodhya-gyan and Yantravali
Vichar-sar Prakranam
Sanskrit Vyakarnam (Sanskrit grammar)
Laghu Sanghgrahani
Amarkosh (Original)
Navpad Puja Prasnothar
Upadhan Vidhi
Sratakatriyam (Bhatruhari)
Chandrika Vyakaranam
Kavyaprakash Mulamam
Varnamala
Upasaka Dashang Sutra
Ek Sou Aath bol
Upadesh Ratna saara
Treloyaka Deepika Yantravali
Karna Granth (four)
Saptati Shatasthan Yantravali
Dwashisth Margana Yantravali
Shada Dravya Vichara
Siddhanta Prakash
Asthanhika Vyakhyana
Sindura Prakara-satika
Bhayhara StotraThe original copy of these books are stored in libraries of Ahor, Rajasthan; Jaora; Mohankheda, Madhya Pradesh; Tharad and Ahmedabad in Gujarat.

Recognition
Shrines dedicated to him were erected at several places in India including Mohankheda, Bhinmal, Dhanera, Jalore, Bangalore, Bijapur, Ahemdabad, Tharad, Bharatpur, Indore, Ratlam, and Santhu, Kachrod,Rajendra Nagar,Devispeta(Nellore District)etc. His death centenary was celebrated in 2006 at Mohankheda.

References
External links
Mohankheda