Reza Ramezani (Persian: رضا رمضانی گیلانی) (* 1963 in Rasht, Northern Iran) is a Twelver Shia Muslim cleric with the religious Rank Ayatollah. He has been a member of the Expert Council (Assembly of Experts) in the Islamic Republic of Iran since 2006. From 2009 to August 2018, he was head and director of the Islamic Center Hamburg, the center of Shiite Islam in Germany. Before working in Hamburg, he headed the Islamic Center Imam Ali Vienna. He is the Secretary-General of the Ahl Al-Bayt World Assembly and the representative of Gilan in the Assembly of Experts. Between 2001 and 2005, he represented the Supreme Leader and the Friday Imams in Karaj.

Life and career
Ramezani studied at the theological faculty in Rasht, later in Mashhad. His teachers include the Ayatollahs. In Qom he then studied Islamic Law and Postgraduate education (ijtihad) with the Ayatollah Mohammad Fazel Lankarani, Wahid Khorasani, Makarem shirazi, Ja'far Sobhani, Taqi Bahjat and Madadi Khorasani, furthermore the subjects exegesis, philosophy with the Ayatollah Hassanzadeh Amoli, Ansari Schirasi, Askari Gilani and Ahmad Beheschti. Then he did his doctorate. "He taught subjects such as Arabic literature, logic, philosophy, Islamic theology, ethics, exegesis, Islamic jurisprudence and canonical foundations at theological faculties in Rasht, Mashhad, Qom and Karaj, in all, including the higher levels,". Ramezani is the author of numerous articles and writings.

Literature
Al-Fadschr No. 136 (The new director of the Islamic Center Hamburg; PDF; 106 kB) Editor: Islamic Center Hamburg.

See also
Zaynolabideen Ghorbani
Encyclopaedia of Islam
Seyed Abbas Hosseini Ghammaghami
Islamic Centre Hamburg
List of Ayatollahs
List of members in the Fifth Term of the Council of Experts

References
External links/references
Profile at the Assembly of Experts (majles khobregan)
Tag Archives: Ayatollah Reza Ramezani Gilani. Ijtihadnet Network
Reza Ramezani Gilani's personal website
Board of Trustees, Ahl al-Bayt University