Richard Eyimofe Evans Mofe-Damijo (born 6 July 1961), popularly known as RMD, is a Nigerian actor, writer, producer, lawyer, and former journalist. He was also a former Commissioner for Culture and Tourism in Delta State in 2009. In 2005, he won the Africa Movie Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. He received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 12th Africa Movie Academy Awards in 2016.

Early life
Mofe-Damijo was born in Aladja community of Udu Kingdom, Delta State. He attended Midwest College, Warri and Anglican Grammar School and was a member of the Drama Club. He enrolled into the University of Benin to continue his education and studied Theatre Arts. In 1997, Mofe-Damijo returned to the university to study law at the University of Lagos and graduated in 2004.

Career
After graduating from the university, Mofe-Damijo took part in the soap opera Ripples, but gained more popularity as villain Segun Kadiri in rival soap Checkmate. Before then, he had a stint as a writer with Concord Newspapers Metro Magazine, and Quality. Out of Bounds was the first film for which he received a writer/producer credit. In 2005, at the maiden edition of the African Movie Academy Awards, Mofe-Damijo won the award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. On 5 January 2017, he hosted the 2016 GLO-CAF Awards alongside Nigerian journalist Mimi Fawaz. On 8 December 2021, he won an award at Ghana, a Black Star Honor at the Rhymes on Da Runway in Gold coast, Ghana.

Political career
Mofe-Damijo was appointed as the Special Adviser of Culture and Tourism to the then Governor Emmanuel Uduaghan in 2008, and later became the commissioner for Culture and Tourism of Delta State, Nigeria in 2009. His tenure ended in 2015.

Personal life
Mofe-Damijo was married to a journalist/publisher and talk show host May Ellen 'MEE' Ezekiel. After her death in 1996, Mofe-Damijo married TV personality Jumobi Adegbesan, who later left TV presenting for the corporate world. Mofe-Damijo has five children: two with his current wife and three from his previous marriage.

Selected filmography
TV Shows
Awards and nominations
References
External links
Richard Mofe-Damijo at IMDb