Shyamal Gangapadhyay (25 March 1933 – 24 September 2001; Bengali: শ্যামল গঙ্গাপাধ্যায়) was a Bengali novelist and editor. He received Sahitya Academy Award in 1993 for the novel of Shahjada Darasukoh, based on the life of Mughal Emperor Dara Shukoh. Early life Gangapadhyay was born in Khulna, British India. His father name was Matilal Gangapadhyay and mother Kiranmoyee Devi. After the partition of 1947 their family came to India. Gangapadhyay was attracted towards student politics while studying in college. In the meanwhile he worked in a Steel factory in Belur. After completion of graduation in 1956, he also worked as teacher for few days in Mathuranath Bidyapith. Literary career In 1960, Gangapadhyay started his journalist career in Anandabazar Patrika. Number of short stories were published in Anandabazar. His first novel Brihannala which was published as Arjuner Aggatobas and mostly admired novel Kubere Bishoy Ashoy in Desh. After 16 years of continuous service he left ABP house due to sudden confrontation with senior editor Santosh Kumar Ghosh and joined in Jugantar Patrika in 1976. He edited literary magazine Amrita. His epic novel Shahjada Darasukoh was published in Saptahik (Weekly) Bartaman Magazine, which was awarded Sahitya Academy in 1993. After retirement Gangapadhyay joined in Aajkaal daily magazine. His last novel was Ganga Ekti Nadir Naam. He wrote series of story of Sadhu Kalachand which is popular for teens. His novels were translated and published in various languages. He won Bibhutibhushan memorial award in recognition of his contribution to the Bengali literature and Gajendra Kumar Mitra memorial prize, Sarat Purashkar in 2000. Works Kuberer Bisoy Ashoy Shahjada Darasukoh (Vol I & II) Iswaritala Roopkatha Hawa Gari Swarther Ager Station Sadhu Kalachand Samagra (Vol I & II) Benche Thakar Swad Class 7er Mr. Bleck Alo Nei Jiban Rahassyo Jatin Darogar Betanto Valobasibona Ar Sudhamoyeer Dinlipi Durbiner Ultodike Vasco Da Gamar Vaipo Gatojanmer Rastai Amaltas Ganga Ekti Nadir Naam Death Gangapadhyay was suffering from Brain Cancer and died at the age of 68 in Kolkata on 24 September 2001. References 