Sylvia Chang (born 21 July 1953) is a Taiwanese actress, writer, singer, producer and director. In 1992, she was a member of the jury at the 42nd Berlin International Film Festival. In 2018, she was one of the jury members of the main competition section at the 75th Venice International Film Festival. Early life Chang was born in Chiayi, Taiwan. She dropped out of school when she was 16, and started her career as a radio DJ. When she was 18 years old she acted in her first film. Career Chang acted in her first film, The Tattooed Dragon (龍虎金剛) (1973), when she was 18 years old. Chang often attempted to do her own stunts in the four-part film series Aces Go Places.She stated in an interview with film editor Clarence Tsui, "I still think Hong Kong's film industry is male-dominated". She also believes that "There aren't many male filmmakers who would write scripts for women". She helped write the script of Run Papa Run, based on the novel by Benny Li Shuan Yan, that follows a man who belongs to the Triad and the relationship he has with his mother, wife, and daughter. Chang said in an interview that, "I thought why don't I explore the gentler side of men". Chang first began performing in theatre productions more than 30 years ago. She returned to the stage   in the production of Design For Living that premiered in November 2008 and went on into 2009.  Chang stated in an interview that, "The reason for me to take on stage play again after 20 years is because I was lured by the director, he has invited handsome guys like Zheng Yuan Chang [sic] and David Huang into the play". Critics have remarked upon the versatility in her roles along with her willingness to always try for something new.Chang is also a singer and her music has become popular in karaoke, where her song "The Cost of Love" is commonly sung.In the 1980s, Chang's second film to direct, Passion, which she wrote and also starred in, won the Hong Kong Film Award for Best Actress. She has stated, "I had never went to any school as a director or a filmmaker, so all my film education actually was from the set".For a time, Chang was the head producer of New Cinema City in Taiwan, but left a few years after joining.  In 20 30 40, she played the 40-year-old woman protagonist, wrote and directed it. Critical reception Chang once said of her films that, "I've always felt that animation or special effects shouldn't just be limited to science-fiction films and their ilk. Dramas can also play around with them". One critic wrote of her, that "In an industry that kisses young actresses with celebrity, then swallows them and spits them out, Chang has a sequoia's longevity. She is the only Hong Kong actress of her generation—the early '70s—to keep starring in movies".Chang's films have been accepted into the London and Toronto International film Festivals. She has served on the jury for the Berlin Film Festival. She also holds the record for the most nominations for Hong Kong Film Award for Best Actress, with nine nominations and 2 wins. Personal life Chang married Hong Kong-based journalist Bob Liu in 1979.  They divorced in 1984.  Chang married Taiwanese businessman Billy Wang Jing-xiong in 1991 and they have one son, Oscar. She also has two stepsons.In July 2000, Chang's nine-year-old son Oscar was kidnapped and held for a ransom of HK $15 million. The police found him after a few days, safe, and arrested the kidnappers. Chang stated, "With your life, you have to move on, there's no other choice; so, out of no choice, then, it's a matter of your attitude". Philanthropy Chang is an advocate and a "life-long volunteer" for World Vision International, the humanitarian aid, development, and advocacy organization. She created an advertisement, sponsored by World Vision, to promote the company, World Vision Advertisement on YouTube. She is a member and advocate for the World Vision-sponsored "30 Hour Famine." Filmography As actress As filmmaker Discography Kolin Records (歌林)1973 Never Say Goodbye 別說再見 1974 Tearfully Say to You 含淚向你說 1977 Farewell (惜別) 1980 Maybe / We Were Young (也许 / 我們曾經年輕)Rock Records1981 Childhood (童年) 1985 Busy and Blind (忙與盲) 1986 Do You Love Me? (你愛我嗎) 1987 Xi shuo (細說), lit. "clarify" or "elaborate" 1992 The Price of Love (愛的代價) Awards and nominations References External links Sylvia Chang at IMDb Sylvia Chang at dianying.com