Trần Quang Đức (Chữ Hán: 陳光德, born 1985) is a Vietnamese art historian, calligrapher, author, and translator. As an art historian his specialisation is the comparative study of Vietnamese cultural history within the Southeast Asian context.His book Ngàn năm áo mũ (“One Thousand Years of Garments”), published in 2013, was awarded the prize "Worthy Book 2014 / New Discovery". Biography Trần Quang Đức was born on 16 May 1985 in Haiphong city. He has courtesy names Nam Phong (南風), Tam Uyển (三碗),  Thí Phổ (施普), pen names Nam Quốc Nhân (南國人), An Biên Bachelor (安邊學士), suite names Cao Trai (高齋), Vân Trai (雲齋), literary name Vân Nang (雲囊) and buddhist name An Biên Attendant (安邊居士).According to the old narrative, in his mother's 9th-month of pregnancy, she dreamed about visiting the daisy garden and seeing the emerald clouds hovering in the sky with completely silent surroundings. On that occasion, his grandfather named him Quang Đức. As a child, he learned Hán Nôm under his grandfather's mentorship. 2003 : Graduate Thái Phiên High School in Haiphong; then passing into the University of Social Sciences and Humanities in Hanoi. 2004 : Win the first prize of Chinese Bridge Competition, its reward was the study abroad at the Peking University. After the graduate, he went back to Hanoi and worked at the Institute of Literature. 2014 : Leaving the Literature Institute to become an independent researcher. Then entered Nhã Nam Book House as an editor, at once instituted Hannom primary classes. 2015: Trần Quang Đức was named #23 in the Vietnamese version of the Forbes 30 Under 30 list as a "Han Nom researcher". The list features individuals renowned in their own industries thanks to their achievements. Works References Twenty-eight mansions of Hanoi Young Calligraphy Club A young man goes throughout thousands years Researcher Trần Quang Đức : Vietnamese culture is the village culture All of costumes in Vietnamese period piece are yet substandard 8X-master : Researching caps-robes and making comics Trần Quang Đức : Only history was not created by fightings To become big nation by very small lessons 80後漢喃字研究家