Valentin Krasnogorov (Russian: Валентин Красногоров, which is a pseudonym, his real name being Valentin Samuilovich Faynberg (Валентин Самуилович Файнберг)); born 20 December 1934, Leningrad, now St. Petersburg, is a Russian-Israeli playwright and writer. Biography and Literature Work Valentin Krasnogorov (20 December 1934, Leningrad, now St. Petersburg, Russia) is one of the best known modern Russian dramatists. Krasnogorov's first play, An Ideal Man, was written in 1976. His plays, The Dog, Small Tragedies, The Delights of Adultery, Somebody Must Leave, Now or Never, Love Medicine, Let's Have Sex!, Several Hours From The Life of a Man and a Woman, That Weak Gentle Sex, The Bride's Room, A Cruel Lesson, etc. have been performed in more than 400 theaters of various countries, including the best Russian theaters, such as Maly Theater – Theater of Europe of Lev Dodin, Great Dramatic Theater, and Alexandrinsky Theater in St.Petersburg. Krasnogorov's theatre pieces are written in different genres: comedies and tragedies, biting satire, grotesque, absurd, and lyricism. Critics noticed that "Krasnogorov's plays cross borders easily". For this reason, many of them have been translated into 30 foreign languages. His plays The Dog, Let’s Have Sex!, The Delights of Adultery and many others have been translated into English. V. Krasnogorov is a member of the Writers Union of Russia; member of the Russian Union of the Theater Workers;. His biography is included in the dictionaries "Marquis Who’s Who in the World", US, "International Who's Who of Intellectuals", England, Cambridge, et al. He was President of the St. Petersburg Playwrights Association in 1987–1991. He is Doctor of Sciences, professor, author of books and papers on chemical engineering. Plays Plays Translated into English Let's Have Sex! Premiere After Party Pelicans of the Wilderness The Delights of Adultery The Dog The Fall of Don Juan Running the Show Ladies by AD The Cruel Lesson Small Tragedies The Visit of a Young Lady Plays in Russian A Night in the Hotel An Invitation to a Murder Babel Immodest Desires Director of the open air shows Love Medicine Love to Distraction Not Tomorrow, but Soon Now or Never (Procession of Gnomes) Premiere After-Party Several Hours in the Life of a Man and a Woman The Fair Show Silent Niagara Small Tragedies Someone Must Leave Song of Songs That Weak, Gentle Sex The Beilis Case The Bride's Room Gates of Paradise The Legs of Woman Number Two The Lot Rendezvous on Wednesdays Swan Song The Woman Who didn't Exist Women by the ad Theatrical Comedy Triangle Rolls Books Four Walls And One Passion (Theory of Drama) Justus Liebig Too Like The Lightning The Delights of Adultery (Plays) Premiere After Party (Plays) 2013 Rendez-vous on Wednesdays (Plays) 2015 Bride's Room (Plays) 2015 History of Russian and Soviet Censorship 2017 About Drama and Theater 2018 References External links Valentin Krasnogorov's personal site