Wave Chow (周榮佳)(born 1975, Hong Kong) is a Senior District Director of AIA and a prolific columnist for Hong Kong Economic Journal, iMoney, Economic Digest and ETNet.

Career
After graduating from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University in 1997 with a Bachelor's degree in Electronic Engineering, Wave joined AIA and embarked on his life's journey as a financial planner for over 25 years.
Today, as a Senior District Director, he is proud and honored to lead an outstanding team of near 300 young professionals of which 96% of the team are tertiary graduates and over 70% have either their Masters or Doctorates. He led by example and groomed his team to achieve a 100% MDRT miracle (including 38.7% TOT & COT).
He is also known as the "Father of IANG", and industry pioneer who recruited and developed IANG graduates since the inception of the immigration program.
As a professional, he is keenly aware of the fundamental need to stay abreast of industry developments and global changes. Therefore, he continues to diligently improve his qualifications. To date, he has obtained 15 professional qualifications such as CFPCM, CPB, ChFC, FChFP, ChLP, CIAM, RFP, LUTCF, HKCIP, ACS and NLPMP.
As an international speaker, he is frequently invited to speak at various major events and training seminars, both in Hong Kong and abroad. He has delivered well over 400 speeches to more than 80,000 people in the past decade.

Writing
Wave is a prolific columnist with topics including wealth management, insurance, MPF, team management, sales skills, workplace and communication. His main purpose is to raise awareness of wealth management for the general public through this expertise and thus make the society more like a 'Utopia'.

Hong Kong Economic Journal,
iMoney
Economic Digest
ETNetHe has also published many books in Chinese, which are "The Key To Building A 100% MDRT Team", "The Soul of Selling", "The Soul of Selling 2.0", "Big Deals" and "Cold Call". They quickly became bestsellers in Eslite and The commercial Press after publications. The first book has also been translated into English, titled "Riding the Wave," which is currently sold worldwide in Asia, the USA, Canada, Greece, Brazil and India, in hardback and as an eBook. Apart from the Hong Kong version, Wave also partners with the top insurance professionals in Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Indonesia and other countries to publish the local version of Big Deals.

《打造100%MDRT團隊─絶密關鍵》
"Riding the Wave: The Key to Building a 100% MDRT Team"
《銷魂：保險銷售的九陽神功》
《銷魂2.0：保險銷售的九陽神功》
《大單：促成天價保單的秘訣》
《大单：马来西亚100%成交秘笈》
《大單：台灣高額保單成交祕笈》
"Big Deals: The Secrets To Closing Big Insurance Deals Revealed"
《Cold Call：保險從零度到零難度》

Personal Honours
5th Asia Trusted Life Agents & Advisers Awards - Digital Agency Leader of the Year 2020
4th Asia Trusted Life Agents & Advisers Awards - Insurance Agency Leader of the Year 2019
AIA Grand District of the Year (GODY) - Champion 2019
AIA Super Grand District of the Year (SGDOY) - Champion 2016
AIA Group President Club Qualifiers
AIA HK and Macau Highest MDRT % District of The Year - Winner and Record Breaker
AIA HK and Macau Super MDRT District of The Year
MDRT Honor Roll and Life Member
The Hong Kong Insurance Awards 2020 - Outstanding Insurance Agent of the Year
iMoney Insurance People of the Year - Hong Kong 2018
GAMA Master Agency Award (MAA)
GAMA International Management Titanium Award (IMA)
GAMA Frontline Leader Diamond Award (FLA)
GAMA Best Growth Gold Award (BGA)
CIA 500 Chinese Insurance Agency - Double Crown Member
IDA Manager Category Award - Platinum
ICMF Ten Million Club (TMC) Supreme Member
LUAHK The Distinguished Manager Award (DMA)
LUAHK Quality Leader Award - Rainbow Qualifier (QLA)
LUAHK Quality Manager Award - Life and Rainbow Qualifier (QMA)
LUAHK The Best Financial Planner Award (BFP)
HKMA SME Outstanding Young Salesperson Award (OYSA)
LIMRA International Quality Award 1999-2009
Wosheng Commercial-Law Outstanding Leadership Award


== References ==