Zabir Saeedزابر سعید (born May 22, 1972) is a Pakistani journalist and editor, known for his columns in Urdu and English newspapers. He is also a writer and public relations practitioner. He has written more than Fifty books about the subjects of mass communication and journalism. Education Saeed received his early education from Saint Joseph School in Lahore, and matriculated from government pilot secondary school, one of the best educational institutions of the time. He completed his F. Sc & B. Sc from Islamia College in Lahore, and then earned his master's degree in mass communication from the department of mass communication of the University of the Punjab in 1996 with distinction. He earned an M.A. in history from the same university. Career Saeed was inspired by his father Saeed Badar, who is also a poet, journalist and writer. His grandfather Hakeem Muhammad Yaqub Munir Azeemi Qadri was another source of guidance and inspiration for him. He has written a book on his life and works. He has contributed articles to several newspapers of Pakistan, such as the dailies Jang, Imroze, and the Pakistan Times. He started his journalistic career as sub-editor for the Lahore daily Nawa-e-waqt. Subsequently, he joined Pakistan’s Jang media group in 2002. He also rendered his services as a public relations practitioner to the water and sanitation agency(WASA) and the University of Education in Lahore as well as other public relations organizations. Achievements Zabir Saeed is renowned as media strategist, public relations practitioner, communication educationist, research scholar and a writer of dozen of books in the fields of Journalism, Mass Communication, Public Relations, History and Current Affairs . He is also known for his articles, columns, features, children stories and won many awards as best feature writer.He actively participated in various literary activities and he is the president of South Asian Literary Forum (SALF).Now -a-days he is associated with the largest Media group of Pakistan the JANG GROUP. He is also delivering lectures in Institute of Communication Studies, University of the Punjab, and many other leading universities as a senior visiting professor. He has been awarded the best Media Educationist for the year 2015 by (SALF) and Recently Zabir Saeed Badar has been given the Lifetime Achievement Award by Pakistan Writers Guild and Qalam Foundation InternationalHe organized the first Perween Shakir literary award in Pakistan in 1995. He is a pioneer of publishing community newspapers of Pakistan in Lahore, founding Makhzan-e-Iqbal, which was the first of its kind. He is a council member of the Lahore Press club and the Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists. Books and publications He has written more than fifty books in the subjects of mass communication, journalism, history, literature, and social psychology. He has also written about 1,000 articles, features, columns, and editorials. Partial bibliography Ablagh Aama Aur Development Sport Communication Ablagh Aama Aur Badalti Dunya Zaban Aur Ablagh Idarat Aur Us Key Jadeed Rujhanaat Khabar Aur Khabriyat Pakistan Aur Global World Sahafat Say Ablaghiat Tak The Voyage of Mass Communication Pakistan Aur Global World Mass Communication Advanced Studies Media Research Media History laws And Ethics Magazine Journalism Language Skills And Communicative Abilities Pakistan Aur Foj References 